Hi there.
This is De La Rue.
And welcome back.
Now let's look at stream operations.
So in this particular lecture, we will look at a broad classification of the stream operations.
In the subsequent lectures, we will actually explore the stream operations in detail.
So we'll get into the specifics in the subsequent lectures.
So earlier we looked at the stream pipeline, which is nothing but a pipeline of operations.
And these operations can be either intermediate operations or terminal operation.
So it can be either zero or more intermediate operations or a terminal operation.
So here we have a nice illustration of a stream pipeline.
So we have a collection at the top, which is the stream source, and the stream source is connected
to a faucet.
And you can regard this faucet as the stream method itself.
So just recall that we were invoking the stream method on a collection instance, and that stream method
would be chained to other operations in order to form a stream pipeline.
So here we have a collection, but in general, we can also have other types of stream sources.
But a collection instance is the typical stream source.
Now here we have the intermediate operation, and an intermediate operation is simply an intermediate
operation, which means that it can be changed with another operation which can be yet another intermediate
operation or a terminal operation, since an intermediate operation can be changed.
It has to produce an object on which another operation can be invoked.
And the object that intermediate operation produces, we know, is the instance of stream.
So it's a stream object.
And a terminal operation, as the name implies, is a terminal operation, which means that it terminates
the stream pipeline.
A terminal operation, unlike an intermediate operation, does not return a stream instance, but it
can return other types of data.
And some of them are shown here like Boolean optional and so on, and we'll be looking at them in subsequent
lectures.
And we also know that terminal operation triggers the execution of the pipeline, as we know that intermediate
operations are lazy operations, while the terminal operation is the eager operation that initiates
the action.
So what it means is once the terminal operation is invoked, only then the elements will be fetched
from the stream source.
The elements will be fetched one at a time in order to be processed by the different operations.
So the invocation of the terminal operation can be regarded as turning the faucet on so that the elements
in the collection would start dripping through the stream pipeline for processing.
And we also know that we cannot invoke another intermediate or another terminal operation on a terminal
operation.
So terminal operation is the last operation, and that is what initiates the processing of the stream.
Until then, the stream pipeline can be considered to be in a dormant state.
Now keep in mind that a stream is not a data structure like a collection.
It is just a bunch of computations applied on each element of a source, which typically is a collection
like we see here.
So just keep that in mind.
It is not a data structure like a collection.
It's just a bunch of computations.
Also streams cannot mutate data.
What this means is the original data structure is unaffected.
However, if the elements in the source data structure are mutable objects, then the state of those
objects can be changed.
But we cannot replace those elements with something else, like a new object or a null value.
And here are the stream operations.
So this is a broad classification of the stream operation types.
In subsequent lectures, we will look at specific operations that fall under these different operation
types.
Here are the first three operation types represent intermediate operations and hence the written stream
instance, while the last three represent terminal operations and they are shown with red symbols indicating
that they terminate the stream.
Just like the stop traffic signals that we see on the streets.
Now here we looked at the first two types in the earlier lecture, the specific operations we saw were
filter and map filter.
We note take a predicate and apply it on the stream element, while MAP applies a function on the stream
element so that it can perform some kind of transformation.
I think the discussion that we had on these two operations in the previous lecture should suffice.
And there is one more method called Flat Map, which falls under the mapping operation type, and at
some point I'll add a lecture on that.
But for now I think just the filter and map should do, and hence we will not be discussing them explicitly,
but we will use them pretty much in every example demonstration in the follow up lectures because they
are very commonly used, so we're not going to discuss them explicitly.
Next one is slicing and slicing can be considered as a special type of filtering operations, as they
also allow only certain elements of the stream to be processed.
It is just that they do not take a predicate as an input, like a filtering operation.
Next we have matching and finding operations.
Match operations will just check if the stream elements match a given predicate so they return a boolean
value.
So they are like filter operations to as they are taking predicate as input, but matching operations
are terminal operations, while filter is an intermediate operation which returns a stream instance
and find operations are like search operations and hence they actually return an element matching certain
criteria.
Next is reduction operations.
UN reduction operations are used to reduce the stream elements into a single value.
So we have a bunch of stream elements and if we want to reduce them into a single value, then we would
use reduce operations and reduce operations repetitively.
Apply a binary operation on the stream elements.
So a binary operation would be used and that would be applied repetitively on the elements.
Finally, collect operations are used to produce an output like a list or a set or a map.
So the input would be a stream of elements, but the output would be something like a list or a set
or a map.
So that's a broad classification of stream operations and we will explore them in detail and subsequent
lectures.
So that's it for now and thank you and see you in the next lecture.